Step by Step of how to set up your new virtual machine! 

Unit: ICT171 Project
Student ID: 35528443
Name: Almir Cavalcante Filho

How to set up a complete Virtual Machine with Amazon AWS EC2 (Elastic IP, Domain via Route53 and SSL Certificate with Let’s Encrypt - HTTPS)


1. starting creating an account in AMAZON AWS with credit card linked to it:

   link:  http://aws.amazon.com/ec2/

   login in -> go to EC2 page -> Launch Instance
 
   Choose a name for your Virtual Machine -> select Ubuntu -> and you can use the free tier machine for studying purposes (750hr / month free for 1 year)

   Configure the instance details - You can leave everything as the default -> he default is to create a virtual machine with an 8GB hard drive. That's fine, leave it at the default.

   There is already SSH rule added to access the machine -> click on add rule and select HTTP (Web) as type (This allows web requests to be received by our server).

   Now click on create a new key pair, choose a meaninful name to identify your machine and save it safely (you need the key everytime you want to log in to your machine).


2. Log in to your machine using the command line:

   Now that your server is running in the cloud you need to login to the command line of your virtual machine.

   Select your machine and click Connect, one similar code like this will be provided to you: 

     code example: ssh -i "yourkeyname.pem" ubuntu@ec2-12-123-1-35.ap-southwest-5.compute.amazonaws.com

   Now open your command line and use the cd (Change Directory) to move to where your machine key was saved on your computer

   Inside the page you can confirm using ls to check all the files on that directory and then copy and paste the connect code to access your machine

   You're in! Once you have command-line access to your virtual machine, the apt repositories may be out of date. Before you install anything, it is often a good idea to update them with :

     code: sudo apt update 

     code: sudo apt install apache2



3. How to create an elastic IP and link it to your existing machine:


An Elastic IP is a static public IP address that you can associate with your EC2 instance. This prevents the IP from changing when you stop and start the instance.

Steps:

Go to the AWS Console → EC2

In the sidebar, click "Elastic IPs"

Click “Allocate Elastic IP address”

Leave the default option ("Amazon pool of IPs")

Click "Allocate"

You’ll see the IP created. Now click “Actions → Associate Elastic IP address”

Under "Resource type", select "Instance"

Choose your EC2 instance

Click "Associate"

DONE! Now your instance has a permanent public IP address.





4. How to buy a domain name with Route 53 and link to your existing machine:


Go to the AWS Console → Route 53

Click “Domain Registration → Register Domain”

Choose and purchase a domain (e.g., my domain costs USD 3 / year  - aussietech.click)

After the domain is registered, go to “Hosted Zones” and click your domain

Click "Create Record":

Record name: leave blank (for root domain)

Record type: A – IPv4 address

Value: enter your Elastic IP

TTL: 300 (or leave default)

Click "Create records"

Your domain now points to your EC2 instance.



5.How to Install an SSL Certificate with Let’s Encrypt (HTTPS):

SSL is essential for security and removes the “Not Secure” warning in browsers. We'll use Certbot with Apache.

Steps:
On your EC2 instance terminal:


sudo apt update
sudo apt install certbot python3-certbot-apache -y


Run Certbot:
sudo certbot --apache

Follow the prompts:

Enter your email

Accept the terms

Certbot will detect your domain (make sure it's already pointing to your IP)

Choose the option to redirect all HTTP traffic to HTTPS



(Optional) Test auto-renewal:

sudo certbot renew --dry-run

Done! Your website is now secured with a valid SSL certificate from Let’s Encrypt.

